
 -----------------------------------------------
|                                               |
|  URLyBird Room Reservation System User Guide  |
|                                               |
 -----------------------------------------------


Startup
-------

From a command line, start the system with the following,

	java -jar <path_and_filename> [<mode>]

where you replace "<path_and_filename>" above with the location of the
"runme.jar" file, and "[<mode>]" is one of 2 values; "server" to startup the
server only, and "alone" to run the system in standalone mode where both the
server and a local client run on the same system.  In standalone mode, the
server does not run, so no remote clients can connect to the system.  If no
mode is specified, the network client and graphical user interface starts up.


Server Mode
-----------

A small window displays when the system is started in server mode.  The database
file is opened and the network server is started.

By default, it will attempt to open the database file "db-1x2.db" in the current
working directory.  If it cannot open the file, an error message will be
displayed with the option to view more detailed information on why the database
file could not be opened.  This should provide enough information to correct the
server configuration (see the section "Server Configuration").

The server window will have a status bar at the bottom showing its current
status.  When it starts up successfully, the status bar will show "Running", and
the server can now accept connections from clients over the network.

To shutdown the server, simply select from the "File" menu, "Exit".

- Server Configuration -

From the "File" menu, select "Configure..." to configure the server.  A new
window will appear with 2 fields.  In server mode, only the "Database File:"
field is applicable.  Either enter the full path to the database file, or
select the file by clicking the "Browse..." button.  This button will bring up
a file selection window where you can navigate the local file system and choose
the database file.

Once the correct database file is selected, click the "Save" button.  A message
will be displayed stating that the system must be restarted for the saved
changes to take effect.  To restart, simply exit the server by selecting the
"File" menu, then "Exit", and running the command again to start the server.


Client Mode
-----------

A window displays when the system is started in client mode, consisting of
fields to search the database by, search buttons, a table to display the search
results in, and a button to book rooms with.  

By default, the client application will attempt to connect to a network server
located at "localhost".  If it cannot establish a connection, an error message
will be displayed with the option to view more detailed information on why the
client failed to connect to the server.  This should provide enough information
to correct the client configuration (see the section "Client Configuration").

The client window will have a status bar at the bottom showing the client
application's current status.  When it starts up successfully, the status bar 
will show "Ready", and you may begin searching for rooms and booking them.

To quit the client, simply select from the "File" menu, "Exit".

- Client Configuration -

From the "File" menu, select "Configure..." to configure the client.  A new
window will appear with 2 fields.  In client mode, only the "Server Hostname:"
field is applicable.  Enter the network name of the computer where the server
is running.  If you do not know the computer name, check with your network
administrator.

Once the correct server hostname is entered, click the "Save" button.  A message
will be displayed stating that the system must be restarted for the saved
changes to take effect.  To restart, simply exit the client by selecting the
"File" menu, then "Exit", and running the command again to start the client.

- Searching -

To search the database for hotel rooms, enter either a hotel name, or a city, or
both, in the corresponding fields at the top of the client window, then click
the "Search" button.  If values are entered for both fields, the database is
searched for records that match both the hotel name and city.  If a value is
entered for only one of the fields, the database is searched for records that
match either the hotel name or the city that was entered.

The searches will look for records that either exactly match the field value(s)
entered, or that begin with them.  For example, a search for a hotel name of
"Holiday Inn" will match records for the hotel names "Holiday Inn" and "Holiday
Inn Express".

Note that the searches are case sensitive, meaning for example that a search
for the city "Dallas" differs from a search for the city "dallas", as a lower
case "d" is not the same as an upper case "D".

All the hotel rooms in the database can be retrieved by clicking the "Search
All" button, or by leaving both the hotel name and city fields blank and
clicking the "Search" button.

To clear the search results, click the "Reset" button, which will clear any
values entered in the search fields and the table of rooms found.

Some errors may occur while searching for rooms, such as losing the connection
to the network server.  A dialog window will be displayed indicating that an
error occurred, and will present the option to show more detailed information.
Usually, restarting the application can resolve network errors.  If that does
not correct the problem, request that the server be restarted.  If you are still
unable to troubleshoot the error, contact your system administrator.

- Booking A Room -

Once an available room is found, it can be booked for a customer.  First, select
the room you wish to book in the table of rooms found.  The selected room should
now be highlighted.  Next, click the "Book" button below the search results, and
a new window will pop up with a field for entering the customer ID for whom the
room is being booked for.  Enter the ID, then click the "OK" button to complete
the booking. 

Some errors may occur while booking a room, such as another CSR booking the same
room before you could click "OK", or losing the connection to the network
server.  A dialog window will be displayed indicating that an error occurred, 
and will present the option to show more detailed information.  Usually,
restarting the application can resolve network errors.  If that does not correct
the problem, request that the server be restarted.  If you are still unable to
troubleshoot the error, contact your system administrator.


Standalone Mode
---------------

The same window for client mode is displayed when the system runs in standalone
mode.  The system functions exactly the same as when running in client mode, 
except no remote connection to a server is made.

The system connects to a database server located on the same computer. By 
default, it will attempt to open the database file "db-1x2.db" in the current
working directory.  If it cannot open the file, an error message will be
displayed with the option to view more detailed information on why the database
file could not be opened.  This should provide enough information to correct the
standalone configuration (see the section "Standalone Configuration").

The system can now be used exactly the same as when running in client mode,
following the same instructions documented above.

- Standalone Configuration -

From the "File" menu, select "Configure..." to configure the system in stand-
alone mode.  Configuration is the same as for server mode.  A new window will
appear with 2 fields.  In standalone mode, only the "Database File:"
field is applicable.  Either enter the full path to the database file, or
select the file by clicking the "Browse..." button.  This button will bring up
a file selection window where you can navigate the local file system and choose
the database file.

Once the correct database file is selected, click the "Save" button.  A message
will be displayed stating that the system must be restarted for the saved
changes to take effect.  To restart, simply exit the application by selecting
the "File" menu, then "Exit", and running the command again to start in stand-
alone mode.


Keyboard Shortcuts (All Modes)
------------------------------

Alt-F	"File" menu
Alt-C	"Configure..." menu (available after selecting the "File" menu)
Alt-X	"Exit" menu (available after selecting the "File" menu)
Alt-S	"System" menu
Alt-A	"About..." menu (displays version information about the application)
